---
layout: post
title:  "Veritas"
date:   2024-12-14 22:30:25 +0530
description: "An exploration of the weight of social conditioning."
keywords: "society, culture, tradition, philosophy"
author: "Chitwan Singh"
categories: [post]
---

Homo Sapiens is a social species, there is no way to escape this fundamental truth about our lives. An individual simply must socialize if they want to survive and/ or thrive. With socialization comes the internalization of the social ideologies, norms and values. One can be a sceptic or a contrarian, trying to question the normative culture, but they can never completely escape it. Society is ever-present, and it appears to be eternal and fixed in nature, but it is not. The most prominent force that acts to supports this fixed idea of society is the emotional appeal of cultural inertia. Tradition plays a huge part in constructing and maintaining socio-cultural realities. Yet on a closer look, all that is needed is the facade of tradition. Another huge force is the appeal to authority. Power and status are universal cross-cultural facets of humanity. Society whether indirectly or directly, always tells individuals to be aspirational towards accumulating power. Moral righteousness, or to be precise its pretence, is the third leg of this holy trifecta that has shaped the socio-cultural realities of human societies for millennia.

What role (if any) does the human intellect play, in either maintaining or transforming, social symbols, norms, values and ideologies? The systematic extraction of knowledge, has pushed society forwards in many spheres, by breaking the hold of tradition, authority and false morality. Science, and its practical extension technology, has allowed humankind to control nature, which has had such a great impact on socialization, that technological progress or its illusion, has itself become a primary force of fashioning social schemas. The old gods of tradition, authority, morality are still going strong, technology has not replaced them, rather it has become a seemly part of the old pantheon. But, the intelligence of an individual human still has no recourse to contest with the deeply ingrained socializing forces described above. There is no need for someone to challenge the prominent social verisimilitude, when there is no immediate advantage for such a taxing and daring endeavour. The imperfect nature of human intellect allows us to believe in contradictions and inconsistencies without even a hint of disharmony. As long as one can adequately mask their empirical values for being a functional member of their society, there is no disarray.

The trigger that allows one to go into active opposition against the prominent hegemony is most often deep and present strife with the currently dominant social institutions. Yet, such a state is almost never achieved by an individual alone. What is vital for this, is the growth of a collective consciousness, that makes it possible for the individual to freely express their views, as part of a community of dissenters. Only collective movements can try to march against the complacent narratives of normative ideologies and institutions. The obvious question then becomes: how to try to create and foster such non conformist movements? Is it not hard enough for a marginalized individual to fight for survival? How to speak truth to complacency without sabotaging one's life irrevocably? Is it morally justified then to compartmentalize one's struggles and to mask deep personal truths when in a situation where speaking out does substantially more harm than good? Is it a blemish on one's personal outlook to always be on the lookout for openings in conversations with others in the hopes of changing their persuasion? These are all very complicated questions that I do not yet have any definitive answers for.

What I do know is that the continuation of the hegemonic norms and traditions is valuable for a lot of people. I do not advocate for tearing down things just for its own sake. But I do aspire for there to be a shift towards a world that espouses values which are egalitarian and just for people of all kinds. To move the pendulum forwards requires a lot of work, but one must remember that, no matter how dark the future appears to be, positive change is always possible.