---
layout: post
title:  "Ethics"
date:   2024-12-01 22:30:25 +0530
description: "My own journey of finding an ethical system that works for me."
keywords: "ethics, morals, philosophy"
author: "Chitwan Singh"
categories: [post]
---

#### Preliminaries:
- I have seen a lot of things. 
- My observations have been of a sociological nature. 
- The theories that I used for my understanding of human nature have failed harshly. 
- I had used a universal and fixed model that rested on the assumption of every person having equal human dignity and respect. 
- As it turns out in reality world is a mess of complex hierarchies and relationships between imperfect individuals who act based on flawed moral systems.

---
#### A More Perfect Moral System
- Utilitarianism:
	- Utilitarianism is generally held to be the view that the morally right action is the action that produces the most collective good in the world. The overall good generated by an action is the summation of good produced for all beings without any discrimination.
- Kantian Ethics:
	- "Good Will" is assumed to be the only unconditionally good virtue. A person has it if they choose their actions, based on a self conscious respect of the moral principles that they believe in. Their good intentions matter, but the consequences of their actions don't.
	- The "Categorical Imperative" is the universal principle that allows one to form Good Will. It states that, "Act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it becomes a universal law." A universal law is something that does not lead to contradictions if and when everyone is assumed to be following it. It prevents us from treating others as merely means to an end.
- Nietzschean Morality:
	- Objective truth as a concept does not exist in our reality. Truth is always a subjective interpretation contingent on the individual's condition. It exists in relation to various fluid perspectives and interests.
	- The world and its imposition of morality restricts an individual from living freely and expressing the true extent of their personality. To be moral then is to throw off the yoke of society and affirm the true nature of existence.
	- Art is the most superior antithesis against nihilism. It constitutes the act of creating something out of the human spirit something that did not exist before. Meaning itself must be crafted in defiance of the indifference and absurdity of the world.

---
**`Any morality is a product of consciousness of an individual's personal relationship with their society.`**

#### My Ethics: Moral Hedonism
- My imperative is to find meaning while learning, connecting with others, and using my skills to make the world a better place.