---
layout: post
title:  "Meaning"
date:   2025-03-31 01:30:25 +0530
description: "The meaning of my life derived from first principles."
keywords: "meaning, purpose, truth, reality, morals, life"
author: "Chitwan Singh"
categories: [post]
---
#### There used to be a time in my life when I was obsessed with the idea of figuring out the meaning of my life. I've since grown up and abandoned such sisyphean endeavours. Regardless, here's what one of my primitive attempts looked like:

<br>
<hr>
<br>

1. I have experienced my external reality to be consistent in nature, which means that I can essentially assume it to be objectively real.

2. Absolute truth does not exist, but I can employ my human intellect to work towards trying to understand facets of existence more deeply.

3. I am a consciousness in an organic body, with a load of accumulated and built in baggage, living in a state of deep connection with others.

4. Existence has no inherent meaning, as death erases everything in the long run, still humans conceive some purpose and meaning to live.

5. Humans are condemned with absolute freedom, the only person truly responsible for one's choices is themselves, no other authority is real.

6. To live an authentic life, is to accept that the only real authority is one's own self, and that one must craft their own purpose in life.

7. Living authentically is an inherent act of rebellion against the world, breaking conventions and finding meaning in an indifferent universe.

8. Everyone must have the chance to live an authentic life, which means that it is imperative for one to protect the freedom of others to do so.

9. The world is strange and awesome, and being able to consciously experience its inordinate beauty, is what gives my life meaning.

10. I aim to live by pursuing intellectual beauty and working to create a more just world, while earnestly being as revolutionary as I can.
