---
layout: post
title:  "Politics 2"
date:   2026-04-23 02:51:51 +0530
description: "Why a more equitable distribution of power is always preferable and how we can use the tools of progressive politics to manifest that vision into reality."
keywords: "power, politics, society, ideology, democracy, media, praxis"
author: "Chitwan Singh"
categories: [post]
---

This piece is the second part of my duology on power and politics. The [first part](https://blog.chitwansingh.rocks/blog/Politics-1) introduced several foundational ideas: why it is impossible for a citizen to be truly apolitical; how power manifests as an intersection of various hierarchies; the mechanisms by which power is enforced, both voluntarily and involuntarily, by members of a social group; how politics — defined as the force that transforms the topology of power — manifests at both individual and collective levels; why it is not optimal to vilify the people on the other side of your political situation; and the fact that most of the political issues at the forefront of the public consciousness can be reduced to a simple question — **should power be more spread out, or should it be more concentrated?** In this part I shall expand on those foundations and attempt to answer why a more equitable distribution of power is always preferable and how we can use the tools of progressive politics to manifest that vision into reality. This is not a full-fledged political manifesto; just a starting guide based on my limited understanding of the world.


### Ideology

If I want to successfully convince you of anything that follows in this post, I must begin with the proposition at the heart of my political philosophy: <u>all humans are equally deserving of dignity</u>. There is a reason I didn't say that all humans **are** equal —  because that would be demonstrably false across all measurable metrics. My argument is that in an ideal world, a utopia if you will, everyone would be afforded an equal amount of opportunity by default. I hope we can agree about this basic premise. The world we currently inhabit is quite far away from that ideal. This is why I believe that the end goal of any humanistic political ideology should be to transform the current world to approximate a utopian vision of the world as closely as possible. I am not going to lay out in detail what a utopia should look like — I don't think that's necessary. What is required is the understanding that the world, as it exists today, is massively unjust and that the point of our political choices should be ultimately to lower power differentials present in society. Everything else simply follows from there.

If you agree with the essence of what I am saying, that's great. But if you don't, and you believe that it's some woke propaganda bullshit, I'd ask you to wait and consider what the opposite of this ideology would look like. Instead of a humanistic vision for politics, let's for a moment, examine a selfish one: the goal of politics should be to transform the world so that it disproportionately benefits you or those near to you. After all, your happiness only depends on your own well being and maybe to a lesser extent on the well being of your family, friends, and neighbours. Perhaps you also care a bit about people who think like you, speak like you, look like you, pray like you, or eat like you. But you clearly don't give a damn about people you've never seen who live far away. So, there exists this gradient in terms of who matters to you, and instinctively you feel that power should be distributed according to that gradient. The problem is that this ideology is not universalizable — if everybody else also demands the same for themselves, things inevitably devolve into a very hot mess.

Having examined the two extremes, let's now address the elephant in the middle of the room which is exemplified by its many namesakes: individualism, libertarianism, meritocracy, etc. All of these share the postulate that in a society, people who are "better" in terms of their "ability" eventually rise to the top and those who are "worse" sink to the bottom — this idea is taken to be a fundamental law of nature. Therefore, the job of politics becomes to prevent any interference with this natural order of things. Hierarchies are considered perfectly valid because they are assumed to appear as an expression of the inherent unequal distribution of talent across societies. While the free market is elevated to the status of an omni-god, public institutions — accountable to everyone and not just those at the top — are seen as superfluous bodies holding back ambition and innovation. Do you find this convincing at all? Because I really do not. This is because it does not take into consideration the fact that the most important factor behind anybody's success is their starting position — their privilege.

Privilege is often defined as unjust or undue advantage. While I get that it comes from good faith, I disagree with that point of view. Because I have no idea how to define what amount constitutes the threshold for undeserving. In my opinion, any amount of advantage is a privilege as long as there are people who have none. As long as there are people who don't have access to food three times a day, the idea of meritocracy is going to be a dastardly lie. The well being of humanity as a whole should be gauged based on how much those at the bottom are suffering and not on how comfortable the lives of those at the top are. The present inequality of access to resources, both tangible and intangible, is not just a bad look; it is oppression by any other name. Being indifferent to the suffering of those you cannot see — or those you willfully ignore — is the same, in essence, as being the oppressor. I am not saying this to guilt trap you. I am saying this because it is true. In this broken world, almost everyone is an oppressor. At the same time, almost all of us also face oppression.

I'd be willing to bet that you often find yourself in situations where the power differentials and hierarchies are unjustly stacked against you — maybe you are queer, disabled, a poor person, or a part of a religious minority. But even if you are not a part of any visibly oppressed group, I'd still be willing to place that same bet on you. This is because no matter who you are (unless you are a billionaire or a despot) there must be some intersection that you occupy where you are bound to face oppression. This is a simple fact of the world: while the privileges are easy to confine, doing the same to persecutions is impossible. Therefore the maxim, "No one is truly free, until all of us are." This is the root of humanism and the humanistic political ideology I subscribe to. I believe that in today's world — where shared truth is hard to find and where we are incentivised in a myriad ways to find points of division and disharmony — we can only save ourselves, and the planet, if we are able to raise our collective consciousness and accept the reality that we are all (almost all of us) in this together.

#### <u>To successfully liberate yourself, you must also liberate humanity!</u>


### Democracy

In 1992, Francis Fukuyama proclaimed the end of history, with liberal democracy clearly on the road to becoming the norm across the world. Not only did that vision not materialise, but democracy as a system of government has arguably been losing credibility since his declaration — with the stalwart of this ideology and causer of many a coup in its name, the US of A itself on the brink of authoritarianism today. While it might be tempting to think that democracy as a model for governance has failed and that we need to try out a new system — corporate autocracy perhaps — in reality our dreams of democracy were never fully realised in the first place. Let's take good old America itself and ponder, "Was it ever a democracy?" When it was established, voting was only for the land owning white man. Eventually every citizen got the right to vote, but even today voter suppression is prevalent. It's also no secret that gerrymandering is open season. What's the worst that can happen when we let the politicians decide how the maps of their constituencies should be drawn? Turns out, spoiler alert, they can draw them in a way that will guarantee their victory. The President of the USA is elected using an antiquated and woefully unrepresentative system known as the Electoral College. Also, ever since "Citizens United", elections have transformed from a voting-based exercise to a game between corporate donors. Is this what we call democracy? We deserve better.

In the past two centuries, as we have increasingly started to worship the myths of free-market economics, power has shifted to undemocratic institutions of capital. The common people, satiated with the morsels they were being fed, never questioned the wholesale sellout of our freedom to the corporate sector. Now that we are facing the catastrophic aftermath of those shifts, our faith in democracy is understandably getting shaken. In truth, the fault is not in democracy, the fault is in how easily we are satisfied with its flawed implementations. If we look around the world, clearly some countries do it much better than others. I am most acquainted with Australia where they have proportional representation, voting is mandatory, gerrymandering is non-existent, and terms of office are short. But even theirs is not a perfect system — corporate lobbying is widespread in Australia. Real democracy is where everybody's voice is heard. While that might be impossibly hard to do in reality, we must still try our best to make strides towards that ideal. We already know what we need to do: abolish gerrymandering, make our electoral commissions independent, impose term limits, adopt more representative and effective voting systems, make voting mandatory, and so on. But only changing the infrastructure of democracy will not by itself make it better, we also need to ensure that people believe in it. Both of these efforts must go hand in hand.

#### <u>The <a href="https://www.journalofdemocracy.org/online-exclusive/how-viktor-orban-loses">defeat of Victor Orban</a> shows us that, against all odds, democracy can still be brought back from the dead.</u>


### Media

It is well known that the very first thing that a budding authoritarian tries to do is to get the media — the newspapers, the radio, the television, and so on — under their control. This is because these outlets are where the general public gets their information from, and once you can control access to information, you can essentially control what reality is. In the country that I inhabit, India, this is something I've seen played out in real time — how, one by one, every newspaper I used to read and tv news channel I used to watch was bought and consolidated by oligarchs close to the ruling party. In 2025, India was ranked 151 out of 180 nations on the [World Press Freedom Index](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Press_Freedom_Index). The massive amount of power that these media institutions have held is now being used for the stifling of truth, for infecting the public spirit with hatred and toxicity, and for further dismantling the values on which this country was established in the first place. It is a very depressing state of affairs indeed. Yet, there is a reason that I am still hopeful about the future. It's because of the very thing that saved me from being pulled into the same pipeline that everyone else around me was getting pulled into: the Internet, perhaps the most disruptive technology ever invented by mankind.

At this particular moment in time, the Internet usually gets a very bad rap. It isn't entirely unjustified either — the concentration of power into the hands of a few corporations who control where our attention gets pointed to is very scary. It is also often heard being said nowadays that we live in a "post-truth" society. While it is clearly an exaggeration, it emerges from a feeling rooted in fact. The Internet, particularly algorithmic social media, has fractured the surface of reality. Our attentions have become prone to being siloed in information chambers that show us only some parts of the world with no reference to others. I personally don't trust these social media platforms or the algorithmic systems that they employ in their feeds. This is why I've developed a [disciplined system](https://blog.chitwansingh.rocks/blog/My-System/) to deal with these platforms in a way that is not detrimental to my well being. I've also [advocated](https://blog.chitwansingh.rocks/blog/Love-The-Internet,-Hate-The-Algorithms/) for everyone else to do this as well. I think that it is very important for everyone to recognize that their relationship with the Internet is not one-directional — while it is true that the Internet shapes them, they also shape the Internet by choosing how to interact with it. The point at which we begin to use it as a tool, rather than just a distraction, is when we start to seriously realise its power. 

The fact that anybody with access to the Internet can make their voice heard is quite revolutionary to say the least. It is a mass democratisation never before experienced by humanity. Attempts by various entities to regulate and censor it have proven quite inadequate and useless. This is justifiably seen as the cause of many problems, but I think that, somewhat counterintuitively, it is also what holds the potential to save us. The Internet is the one form of media that the government, at least here in India, has been unable to fully control — [despite their ongoing efforts](https://internetfreedom.in/the-rise-of-infrastructure-for-digital-censorship/). In the past few years I have observed how, fostered by the Internet, an active resistance against the onslaught of the regime has grown in force. Even in the US, where it was widely held responsible for the victory of Donald Trump in the last election, the MAGA discourse-ocracy has now started to turn against him after his latest attempt to cause World War III. These are encouraging signs for sure, but at the same time the right-wing foundries of hatred and division are also going full force. This is very much an active battle that can go either way. That is why it becomes our duty to use our platforms, no matter how inconsequential, to educate, to organise, and to raise the collective consciousness.

#### <u>"We won because we insisted that no longer would politics be something that is done to us. Now, it is something that we do." -Zohran Mamdani</u>


### Praxis

There are a million different awful things happening all over the world at any single moment. How can an individual handle being at the tail end of the firehose of bad news coming at them from all directions, let alone do something productive about any of the issues that seem to deeply affect them? I can only imagine how anyone in such a situation could start to lose sight of what got them caring about those issues in the first place. Once dis-coherence settles in, it is easy to fall into apathy as well. This is why it is paramount to develop a discipline with regards to your news consumption habits as well as a sense of focus concerning the issues that really matter to you. I've learnt this from John and Hank Green, who are legitimate experts in trying to make the world a better place. They have, along with the community that arose around their work known as Nerdfighteria, raised [more than $17 million](https://fightworldsuck.org/) for charity, successfully advocated for the patents of tuberculosis drugs to be made public, collaborated with PIH to build a [MCOE](https://nerdfighteria.info/v/IppQH8Bd3r8/) in Sierra Leone to address the maternal mortality crisis, and massively contributed to public education via their non-profit company Complexly. Another thing that I've learnt from them is the importance of listening to others. I'd encourage you to also immerse yourself in positive communities that can be your anchor and allow you to impact real change in collaboration with others who share your concerns. 

#### <u>"For me the discipline of hope is based on the premise that people who are closest to the hurt are also closest to the solutions." -Nato Green</u>