---
layout: post
title:  "Love The Internet, Hate The Algorithms"
date:   2026-02-21 17:09:37 +0530
description: "A meditation and a guide on being on the Internet in the age of algorithms."
keywords: "algorithms, Internet, online, community, social media"
author: "Chitwan Singh"
categories: [post]
---

The advent of algorithmic social media could very well prove to be a destabilising turn for humanity. One of the biggest problems that have emerged out of its rapid adoption is that of context overload due to the randomness inherent in such systems. Giving everyone a platform without any restrictions on what they can create on it (spoiler alert) has turned out to be a stupid experiment. Apart from the obvious problem of moderation in such distributed entities, there is also the greater issue that most of the largest social media platforms are under the control of huge corporations whose ends are likely to be quite misaligned from the end goals of both individuals and societies at large.

More and more people are acknowledging that the way social media platforms hijack their attention is not healthy for them. The platforms push outrageous and over the top content that is more likely to keep users hooked. This is because the goal of these algorithms and platforms is to maximise the amount of awareness they capture without any care about the effect that the awareness capture has on their users. This leads to the prevalence of misinformation, hateful content, and clickbait on these algorithmically generated feeds. A more acute issue is that of heavy user data tracking (and the privacy violation that this entails) by these companies for making their content as well as advertisement recommendations increasingly more potent.

In my opinion, the solution to all these problems is not trivial. Completely getting off social media is just not feasible for most of us. Despite all its negatives it still serves as an important source of information, inspiration, and community. A blanket ban on social media (like most forms of overreaching control) [is most likely to hurt the people who are the most vulnerable](https://internetfreedom.in/a-social-media-ban-will-not-save-our-children/]). The thing that we must understand is that social media is not just a drug — its impact compares much more closely to that of junk food. It is therefore very important to understand and control our social media diets. Each one of us needs to design a system of media hygiene that specifically works for them.

Our attention is one of the most valuable resources available to us. If we are engaging with a social media platform then we must be able to curate and control what we are paying attention to. If a social media platform takes that power away from us, then by using that platform we are just submitting our consciousness to them for free. This is why I advocate for us to collectively reject feeds that are uncurate-able and highly addictive. We can instead choose to go to the feeds that respect our attention and our intentionality. An important step is to just realise that we have a lot of power to take back our attention. There are many tools (see RSS) and techniques at our disposal that could be employed to soften the impact of the malicious algorithms.

I personally am still hopeful about the social internet. Despite all its macro level flaws, I still believe that algorithmic social media platforms are markedly better than traditional media at being a truthful representation of the world we live in. (At least the platforms that are not an obvious propaganda machine for their billionaire owners.) If an algorithm has an element of randomness in it, then it is by design somewhat resilient to getting completely propagandised. I believe that educating ourselves and exercising our power by being intentional — both individually and collectively — against the misaligned interests is the key that will unlock an era of a better, more grounded, social internet.