---
layout: post
title:  "Immigration is Good"
date:   2026-05-08 13:23:29 +0530
description: "Immigration is the solution to population crunch in western countries, and we need to start telling this to everyone."
keywords: "immigration, population, society, collapse, economics, politics"
author: "Chitwan Singh"
categories: [post]
---

All over the developed world, countries are seeing their fertility rates plummet. I've often come across discourse claiming that the West needs to have more babies or the imminent population crunch could be catastrophic, as more and more of the population turns older with less and less young people to support them. I, as a resident of a developing country, am used to hear the opposite advice. Here, instead of a population crunch, we face a population bomb. The increasing number of young people is seen as the cause of problems (like massive unemployment). What has baffled me for years is that not once have I encountered anybody talking about the simple idea that could solve both these problems at once. Just let the people move from where there are more of them to places where their numbers are low. Why is this idea so taboo that it is never even considered in discussions of the above mentioned issues? The answer, we might think, is purely bigotry and prejudice. But that would be too reductive. In reality, the answer is a lot more nuanced and complicated.

I must say here that I am pro-immigration, as I've laid out in my previous [discussion](https://chitwan27.github.io/blog/Immigration/). The fact that I need to declare my allegiance to one side of the issue is because the issue of immigration has nowadays become a part of the culture wars — you either have to be for it or against it. As one can imagine, this leads to a flattening of the discourse and prevents people from critically engaging with the the ideas at hand. I'll frankly say that I'm part of the problem too because I **want** immigration to be the golden bullet that solves both population collapse in rich countries and the population explosion in poorer ones. I'm ideologically aligned with immigration as I want there to be a flow of resources and wealth from the global north to the global south. The global inequality of wealth and opportunity, in my opinion, is the direct result of unfair European and American imperialism, and the only way to reverse it is redistribution. If that is something which can be achieved via large scale immigration — while at the same time solving the impending population disasters across the globe — won't that be a really amazing thing?

So, this is what motivates my interest in this issue. But as I've said before, being motivated to feel either way about a debate is a veritable weakness. I have laid bare my weakness in the hope that both you, the reader, and I can be mindful of it as we go ahead with the discussion. Now, we can finally begin peeling away the layers and complexities of the reasons behind why this issue is mired in so much tension and toxicity. First things first, as has been proven by the work of researchers from around the world, a controlled amount of immigration is primarily beneficial, even to the degree of being a necessity, to developed countries with low fertility rates. [This is not something I am claiming, but something I am basing on expert consensus.](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1006331030823). Then why do we see the recent rise of anti immigration sentiments across the globe. Why do we see these worrying trends? The answer is multifaceted, from the impact of social media in undermining a shared reality and boxing us into echo chambers of hate, to the general decline in the standard of living and increased suffering for working people due to the machinations of late stage capitalism. Immigrants are the perfect scapegoat — they are seen as the outsiders, the job-stealers, the uncivilised, and so on. This perception, while being utterly out of proportion, does stem from real observation. People are wont to only see the short term effects of immigration, which are: a more competitive labour market, a shift in cultural expression, and higher pressure on public services. They don't see the long term effects — one of which is, of course, preventing population collapse in their countries. It is very hard to reach the level of raised consciousness that it takes to see the larger picture, especially nowadays as, across the world, the political right has learnt to exploit and inflame this issue to their advantage.

Secondly, it is important for me to bring to your attention the fact that there is a certain power differential implicit in the discussions around immigration. The humanity of the prior residents and citizens is always given more weight over those of the incoming migrants. This is not just because of internalised racism and centuries of imperial baggage, but also because those people are the ones who hold the power to vote and decide what sort of immigration policy gets implement in their constituencies. These are some of the reasons why people are wary of even mentioning the obvious solution when discussing the impending population crunch in rich countries. And this pains me a lot, not just because it goes against my "agenda", but also because it promotes an obfuscated version of the whole truth. Truth should not be contingent on how people are going to receive it. If we keep leaning more and more into that urge, we are going to end up trapped in a loop of trying to appease the imaginary audience in our minds. So, how exactly do we get out of this labyrinth of nonsense? The answer is to proceed with sincerity and kindness. In the long term, we must convince the general citizenry of the humanity of people outside of their imagined tribes. But that is perhaps a goal too large to be actionable. The short term and more direct approach is to listen and address the very real and tangible issues that are at the root of this rising distrust of immigration. Illegal immigration needs to be tackled head on — frauds need to be stopped and loopholes must be closed. The perception that immigration is unfair needs to be turned around. We need to start talking more about the benefits that it brings, and promote a holistic vision of how it is an effective solution to address population stresses around the world.