---
layout: post
title:  "Politics 1"
date:   2026-03-08 20:29:23 +0530
description: "A basic primer on Power and Politics introducing what are, in my opinion, the most important concepts and issues one needs to understand before considering how to solve the problems that encompass today's political discourse."
keywords: "power, politics, society, philosophy, individual, ideology"
author: "Chitwan Singh"
categories: [post]
---

According to Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia, "**Politics** is the set of activities that are associated with making decisions in groups, or other forms of power relations among individuals, such as the distribution of status or resources." Here, **Power** can be vaguely defined as the ability to influence the actions and/ or the opinions of other people. In my years-long journey through the *Indian Education System*, I was never introduced to these terms or their definitions. This was both a function of my own choice — choosing a scientific stream for my higher secondary — and also by design because the way the curriculums are designed basically dictates what you learn and what you don't. Before I was even able to learn and conceptualise what these things meant, they were already *happening* to me. Choices, that I wasn't even aware of, were being made for me, and the path of my life was being fashioned, without my say or even my knowledge. Had everything gone according to plan, I might have turned out ***apolitical***, a perspective espoused by a lot of people in my vicinity who claim that *politics isn't for them*.

Despite the circumstances, having eventually learnt what politics and power mean, I also came to understand that as long as a person has agency and is part of a society, they cannot be apolitical in any sense of the word. Politics happens regardless of whether it is _acknowledged_ or not, and everybody exercises power over others in ways both _winding_ and **direct**. Just because a person does not vote does not mean that the laws in their jurisdiction do not apply to them. To say that one is apolitical is simply to declare a disinterest in understanding how politics and power shape one’s life and the lives of everyone else. It is like saying one is non-mathematical and cannot see how numbers affect daily life. While it is said that ignorance is bliss, ignorance is also at the root of stupidity. Some people can afford to live their whole lives in ignorance and stupidity, but most people just cannot. Learning how the world works and trying to understand one’s place in it is paramount to living a full life as a human being. Understanding power and politics provides the vision to better see — and better shape — one’s place in society. 

We all intuitively know that not everyone in a society has the same amount or even the same kind of power. In a white supremacist society, people of color have less power than white people — this is true both in a collective and in an individual sense. In a patriarchal society, which is to say most modern societies still, men hold more power than women in general. But power is not as straightforward as it sounds. In a typical Indian middle class family unit, even if the father has the last say over how things are to be done, the mother might still hold a lot more power over her male children than vice versa. The parent child dynamic mostly overpowers the gender aspect. This is because power manifests in a myriad of ways — as a complex **intersection** of even more complicated **hierarchies**. Throughout history various schemes have been adopted to distribute power that still persist (or in some cases thrive) today: tribalism, casteism, feudalism, capitalism, and so on. External identifiers like skin color, gender identity, sexual expression, looks, height, bodily ability, etc have been used as a way to give (or deny) differential authority to people. On a less macro, more interpersonal scale, power likely gets derived from relationships, ability, charisma, and other interpersonal traits. 

Having discussed the inequity of power distribution, the next question that needs tackling is: where exactly does power come from? Does it flow downward from God to king to noble to peasant? Not really. Power, to put it very simply, ultimately <a href="https://iep.utm.edu/soc-cont/">comes from the people</a>. The agency we have as individuals gets transferred and collectivised into socially sanctioned forms of control such as norms, rules, laws, and expectations that maintain the balance of power. These normative facts are hypothetically enforced by the threat of violence, but actual violence is not even required, since once social constructions and formations of control are internalized, individuals themselves become the enforcers and ambassadors of the same power equations. We are extremely social creatures, and we have mechanisms ingrained in our psyche that both absorb and reflect this social dogma. <u>Eventually, it all becomes a part of our moral constitution.</u> We only ever realise how deeply ingrained these values are if and when something extraordinary causes friction between our perspective and the external reality we inhabit. Once we become conscious of an unreasonable power dynamic, we might want to understand why it persists, or change the way things are. That is where politics comes in.

In the natural world, all matter has inertia and needs physical force to get moved around. Similarly in human societies, **power has inertia and it needs political force to be moved** around. In ideological terms, your politics is how you want power to flow. But politics is really an umbrella term for two different but closely related things: the set of ideas that one believes with respect to how power should be distributed in the world and the set of actions that one performs to affect change in the existing distribution of power. While one could be ignorant of the political ideology that they ascribe to, they cannot be excused the responsibility that comes with their political actions. In a sense all the choices that we make in our life are political, but some choices have a much greater impact on the world than others. It is therefore useful to consider the magnitude of impact as a metric for gauging the importance of one's political opinions and actions. Another dimension to add onto our system is that of proximity — in terms of physicality but also in terms of time. It is natural that issues that one interfaces with day in and day out would obviously carry more importance for them than issues that, from their perspective, are far away and infrequently dealt with. Each person, having a unique vantage point, has a different hierarchy of things that they care about. This compounds and intersects with the fact that some choice matter more than others in terms of their potential impact. Thus, at least on an individual level, this system — *with proximity on one axis and impact on the other* — is what we make use of to gauge the importance of our opinions and actions.

On a societal level, everyone's ability to impact change is different. As we discussed in a previous section, each one of us is imbued with a different set of privileges and has a different amount of power. Obviously, the more power one has to begin with, the greater is their ability to change the way it flows. But individuals, no matter how powerful they might be, are largely powerless on the societal scale. **Politics is the domain of collectives** — groups of people who share political ambitions. While this may not be entirely accurate, it is clearly true that the more people a political movement has behind it, the stronger its power to change things is. But why would individuals come together like so in the first place? This is because across societies there is a lot of homogeneity in lifestyles and living conditions. And because one's politics is mostly a function of their circumstance. Let's consider these examples: perhaps, you are well satisfied with the slot you occupy in the social hierarchy, and you want things to remain the way they are, then you might profess some strain of conservative politics; if instead you find yourself at the margins, struggling with the options afforded to you, then you might start thinking about shaking things up a bit. <u>Thus, one's political perspective is highly dependent on the context they inhabit. Simultaneously, it is also inextricably linked with their deeply held personal beliefs.</u> When either of those things changes, their politics also mutates and evolves. But that rarely happens in actuality. Politics is quite tied up with our sense of self, much as religion is. And so like religion, it has a tendency to both feed on and exacerbate our biases and prejudices. It is very hard to think critically about stuff that you believe to be a core part of your identity. This is true for people on all points of the left-right (progressive to conservative) spectrum.

Before one even attains political maturity, it's very easy for them to fall into the trap of characterising the people on the opposite side of the spectrum from them as a combination of evil and stupid. Most of the modern political discourse is prone to this so much that it has become the default way of looking at things. But, if you take a pause and earnestly try to see how they actually perceive the world, their positions start making a lot more sense. This is because the real problem is not that people on the opposite end of the spectrum are bad people. **The problem is that their salience frames are a lot different from yours; that is, the lenses they use to observe the world enhance and filter out aspects of reality quite differently.** It's almost as if they inhabit an alternate reality. When you understand this fact, it becomes clear that in order to convince them, you must first bring them into your own world (or transport yourself to theirs, but that might not be optimal). This is why it is so important to replace superficial political debates with nuanced political discourse across the divides — actually listening to your opponents instead of arguing with their proxies. One astounding facet of the modern political scene is the incredible reducibility of the myriad of political issues and aspirations to the simple left/ right spectrum. **There appears to be one singular question at the root of any and all political debates: should power be more spread out, or should it be more concentrated?** All political arguments, if you remove the extra baggage, appear to be just about this simple question. One might think this makes convincing others an easy job. In actuality, it might signal the opposite. One's position on the spectrum is very deeply intertwined with their sense of self. As discussed earlier, anything tied up so deep is very hard to untangle. While this probably does not make convincing them an easier job, it does make it easier to understand them. In my opinion, understanding others, especially those who are different from us, is the key to this whole <a href="https://blog.chitwansingh.tech/blog/Politics-2">politics hullabaloo</a>.